dbt State model concurrency (#9795)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/deploy/dbt-state-migration.md

- **`build_after` vs `lag_tolerance`**: Both configs reduce how often a model runs when upstream data is frequently fresh, but they work differently:
  - `freshness.build_after` (for example, `{count: 4, period: hour}`) skips the model unless the configured interval has elapsed _and_ upstream sources have new data since the last run. A SQL change alone does not trigger a rebuild; both conditions must be met.
  - `state.lag_tolerance` (for example, `4h`) skips the model unless upstream data is newer than the model's last run by at least the configured interval. Unlike `build_after`, a detected SQL change triggers a rebuild.

> - **No concurrent build detection**: In most cases, dbt State handles overlapping jobs the same way as state-aware orchestration: Job 1 builds the model, and Job 2 sees that the model has already been built and reuses it. However, if both jobs reach the same model at the same time, before Job 1 records in state that the model is complete, both jobs can build the model independently. For snapshots and incremental models, this can lead to data corruption.

Reviewer: Models are excluded from execution at the start of the job. So as long as Job 1 has finished building the snapshot before Job 2 starts, then it will be completely skipped/reused. If Job 1 finishes building the snapshot after Job 2 starts, but before Job 2 gets to that snapshot, then it will waste some compute re-determining that there's no new data, but won't corrupt data. 

The risk scenario is if Job 2 starts building the snapshot before Job 1 has finished. Then both invocations will detect new/modified records inside of their standalone transactions, and both changesets will be committed.

Author: Hey @joellabes , let me know if this correctly captures the behavior:

```suggestion
- **No concurrent build detection**: In most cases, dbt State handles overlapping jobs the same way as state-aware orchestration: if Job 1 finishes before Job 2 starts, Job 2 sees the model as already built and reuses it. If Job 1 finishes after Job 2 starts &mdash; but before Job 2 builds that model &mdash; Job 2 still builds the model and uses compute to re-determine there's no new data. However, if Job 2 starts building the same snapshot or incremental model before Job 1 finishes, both jobs can detect the same changes in their separate transactions and commit them, which can lead to data corruption.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I don't think this isn't correct. This isn't really about duplicate compute. SAO would also have one model build, and then see if the other one needed building. In 99.9% of the time, State will do the exact same thing. Two hourly jobs can run the same model, job 1 will build it, and job 2 will see it's already been built and reuse it. This is only about the edge case where job 1 and job 2 hit the model at the exact same time so job 1 hasn't yet pushed back to state to say that the model has been updated.

Author: Addressed here: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/9795/commits/42a9a33614b3f15c8172cbbd20ced56af549a6f0

> - **No concurrent build detection**: In state-aware orchestration, if a model was being built by one job, any other job that included the same model would skip it. dbt State doesn't have this mechanism; if two jobs include the same model and run at the same time (for example, an hourly and a daily job that overlap), both jobs build the model independently. This doesn't cause data corruption because the warehouse handles concurrent writes, but it does result in duplicate compute. 

Reviewer: >This doesn't cause data corruption because the warehouse handles concurrent writes, but it does result in duplicate compute. 

This _can_ cause data corruption in snapshots and incremental models if they execute simultaneously on two jobs.

Author: Fixed [here](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/9795/commits/8e1dbb944692c072a1b6a6884da4c1a441d7efc5)

>   To prevent duplicate builds, ensure jobs that share the same models don't run at the same time &mdash; whether by configuring job schedules through the [<Constant name="dbt_platform" /> job scheduler](/docs/deploy/job-scheduler) or an external orchestration tool (for example, Airflow or Dagster), or by avoiding manually triggered runs that overlap.

Author: ```suggestion
  To prevent duplicate builds, ensure jobs that share the same nodes don't run at the same time &mdash; whether by configuring job schedules through the [<Constant name="dbt_platform" /> job scheduler](/docs/deploy/job-scheduler) or an external orchestration tool (for example, Airflow or Dagster), or by avoiding manually triggered runs that overlap.
```
